# 10 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 13 Mar to 17 Mar

### Neuro-symbolic Commonsense Social Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.08264 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08264)]  
**abstract**: Social norms underlie all human social interactions, yet formalizing and reasoning with them remains a major challenge for AI systems. We present a novel system for taking social rules of thumb (ROTs) in natural language from the Social Chemistry 101 dataset and converting them to first-order logic where reasoning is performed using a neuro-symbolic theorem prover. We accomplish this in several steps. First, ROTs are converted into Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR), which is a graphical representation of the concepts in a sentence, and align the AMR with RoBERTa embeddings. We then generate alternate simplified versions of the AMR via a novel algorithm, recombining and merging embeddings for added robustness against different wordings of text, and incorrect AMR parses. The AMR is then converted into first-order logic, and is queried with a neuro-symbolic theorem prover. The goal of this paper is to develop and evaluate a neuro-symbolic method which performs explicit reasoning about social situations in a logical form.  

### Can neural networks do arithmetic? A survey on the elementary numerical skills of state-of-the-art deep learning models
**source**: arXiv:2303.07735 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07735)]  
**abstract**: Creating learning models that can exhibit sophisticated reasoning skills is one of the greatest challenges in deep learning research, and mathematics is rapidly becoming one of the target domains for assessing scientific progress in this direction. In the past few years there has been an explosion of neural network architectures, data sets, and benchmarks specifically designed to tackle mathematical problems, reporting notable success in disparate fields such as automated theorem proving, numerical integration, and discovery of new conjectures or matrix multiplication algorithms. However, despite these impressive achievements it is still unclear whether deep learning models possess an elementary understanding of quantities and symbolic numbers. In this survey we critically examine the recent literature, concluding that even state-of-the-art architectures often fall short when probed with relatively simple tasks designed to test basic numerical and arithmetic knowledge.  

### Ultra-High-Resolution Detector Simulation with Intra-Event Aware GAN and Self-Supervised Relational Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.08046 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08046)]  
**abstract**: Simulating high-resolution detector responses is a storage-costly and computationally intensive process that has long been challenging in particle physics. Despite the ability of deep generative models to make this process more cost-efficient, ultra-high-resolution detector simulation still proves to be difficult as it contains correlated and fine-grained mutual information within an event. To overcome these limitations, we propose Intra-Event Aware GAN (IEA-GAN), a novel fusion of Self-Supervised Learning and Generative Adversarial Networks. IEA-GAN presents a Relational Reasoning Module that approximates the concept of an ''event'' in detector simulation, allowing for the generation of correlated layer-dependent contextualized images for high-resolution detector responses with a proper relational inductive bias. IEA-GAN also introduces a new intra-event aware loss and a Uniformity loss, resulting in significant enhancements to image fidelity and diversity. We demonstrate IEA-GAN's application in generating sensor-dependent images for the high-granularity Pixel Vertex Detector (PXD), with more than 7.5M information channels and a non-trivial geometry, at the Belle II Experiment. Applications of this work include controllable simulation-based inference and event generation, high-granularity detector simulation such as at the HL-LHC (High Luminosity LHC), and fine-grained density estimation and sampling. To the best of our knowledge, IEA-GAN is the first algorithm for faithful ultra-high-resolution detector simulation with event-based reasoning.  

### NeuroQL: A Neuro-Symbolic Language and Dataset for Inter-Subjective Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.07146 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07146)]  
**abstract**: We present a new AI task and baseline solution for Inter-Subjective Reasoning. We define inter-subjective information, to be a mixture of objective and subjective information possibly shared by different parties. Examples may include commodities and their objective properties as reported by IR (Information Retrieval) systems, that need to be cross-referenced with subjective user reviews from an online forum. For an AI system to successfully reason about both, it needs to be able to combine symbolic reasoning of objective facts with the shared consensus found on subjective user reviews. To this end we introduce the NeuroQL dataset and DSL (Domain-specific Language) as a baseline solution for this problem. NeuroQL is a neuro-symbolic language that extends logical unification with neural primitives for extraction and retrieval. It can function as a target for automatic translation of inter-subjective questions (posed in natural language) into the neuro-symbolic code that can answer them.  

### Symbolic Regression for PDEs using Pruned Differentiable Programs
**source**: arXiv:2303.07009 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07009)]  
**abstract**: Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have been widely used to obtain accurate neural surrogates for a system of Partial Differential Equations (PDE). One of the major limitations of PINNs is that the neural solutions are challenging to interpret, and are often treated as black-box solvers. While Symbolic Regression (SR) has been studied extensively, very few works exist which generate analytical expressions to directly perform SR for a system of PDEs. In this work, we introduce an end-to-end framework for obtaining mathematical expressions for solutions of PDEs. We use a trained PINN to generate a dataset, upon which we perform SR. We use a Differentiable Program Architecture (DPA) defined using context-free grammar to describe the space of symbolic expressions. We improve the interpretability by pruning the DPA in a depth-first manner using the magnitude of weights as our heuristic. On average, we observe a 95.3% reduction in parameters of DPA while maintaining accuracy at par with PINNs. Furthermore, on an average, pruning improves the accuracy of DPA by 7.81% . We demonstrate our framework outperforms the existing state-of-the-art SR solvers on systems of complex PDEs like Navier-Stokes: Kovasznay flow and Taylor-Green Vortex flow. Furthermore, we produce analytical expressions for a complex industrial use-case of an Air-Preheater, without suffering from performance loss viz-a-viz PINNs.  

### Transformer-based Planning for Symbolic Regression
**source**: arXiv:2303.06833 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06833)]  
**abstract**: Symbolic regression (SR) is a challenging task in machine learning that involves finding a mathematical expression for a function based on its values. Recent advancements in SR have demonstrated the efficacy of pretrained transformer-based models for generating equations as sequences, which benefit from large-scale pretraining on synthetic datasets and offer considerable advantages over GP-based methods in terms of inference time. However, these models focus on supervised pretraining goals borrowed from text generation and ignore equation-specific objectives like accuracy and complexity. To address this, we propose TPSR, a Transformer-based Planning strategy for Symbolic Regression that incorporates Monte Carlo Tree Search into the transformer decoding process. TPSR, as opposed to conventional decoding strategies, allows for the integration of non-differentiable feedback, such as fitting accuracy and complexity, as external sources of knowledge into the equation generation process. Extensive experiments on various datasets show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, enhancing the model's fitting-complexity trade-off, extrapolation abilities, and robustness to noise. We also demonstrate that the utilization of various caching mechanisms can further enhance the efficiency of TPSR.  

### DOMINO: Visual Causal Reasoning with Time-Dependent Phenomena
**source**: arXiv:2303.06556 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06556)]  
**abstract**: Current work on using visual analytics to determine causal relations among variables has mostly been based on the concept of counterfactuals. As such the derived static causal networks do not take into account the effect of time as an indicator. However, knowing the time delay of a causal relation can be crucial as it instructs how and when actions should be taken. Yet, similar to static causality, deriving causal relations from observational time-series data, as opposed to designed experiments, is not a straightforward process. It can greatly benefit from human insight to break ties and resolve errors. We hence propose a set of visual analytics methods that allow humans to participate in the discovery of causal relations associated with windows of time delay. Specifically, we leverage a well-established method, logic-based causality, to enable analysts to test the significance of potential causes and measure their influences toward a certain effect. Furthermore, since an effect can be a cause of other effects, we allow users to aggregate different temporal cause-effect relations found with our method into a visual flow diagram to enable the discovery of temporal causal networks. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods we constructed a prototype system named DOMINO and showcase it via a number of case studies using real-world datasets. Finally, we also used DOMINO to conduct several evaluations with human analysts from different science domains in order to gain feedback on the utility of our system in practical scenarios.  

### Logic Against Bias: Textual Entailment Mitigates Stereotypical Sentence Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.05670 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.05670)]  
**abstract**: Due to their similarity-based learning objectives, pretrained sentence encoders often internalize stereotypical assumptions that reflect the social biases that exist within their training corpora. In this paper, we describe several kinds of stereotypes concerning different communities that are present in popular sentence representation models, including pretrained next sentence prediction and contrastive sentence representation models. We compare such models to textual entailment models that learn language logic for a variety of downstream language understanding tasks. By comparing strong pretrained models based on text similarity with textual entailment learning, we conclude that the explicit logic learning with textual entailment can significantly reduce bias and improve the recognition of social communities, without an explicit de-biasing process  

### ART: Automatic multi-step reasoning and tool-use for large language models
**source**: arXiv:2303.09014 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09014)]  
**abstract**: Large language models (LLMs) can perform complex reasoning in few- and zero-shot settings by generating intermediate chain of thought (CoT) reasoning steps. Further, each reasoning step can rely on external tools to support computation beyond the core LLM capabilities (e.g. search/running code). Prior work on CoT prompting and tool use typically requires hand-crafting task-specific demonstrations and carefully scripted interleaving of model generations with tool use. We introduce Automatic Reasoning and Tool-use (ART), a framework that uses frozen LLMs to automatically generate intermediate reasoning steps as a program. Given a new task to solve, ART selects demonstrations of multi-step reasoning and tool use from a task library. At test time, ART seamlessly pauses generation whenever external tools are called, and integrates their output before resuming generation. ART achieves a substantial improvement over few-shot prompting and automatic CoT on unseen tasks in the BigBench and MMLU benchmarks, and matches performance of hand-crafted CoT prompts on a majority of these tasks. ART is also extensible, and makes it easy for humans to improve performance by correcting errors in task-specific programs or incorporating new tools, which we demonstrate by drastically improving performance on select tasks with minimal human intervention.  

### Generating symbolic music using diffusion models
**source**: arXiv:2303.08385 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08385)]  
**abstract**: Probabilistic Denoising Diffusion models have emerged as simple yet very powerful generative models. Diffusion models unlike other generative models do not suffer from mode collapse nor require a discriminator to generate high quality samples. In this paper, we propose a diffusion model that uses a binomial prior distribution to generate piano-rolls. The paper also proposes an efficient method to train the model and generate samples. The generated music has coherence at time scales up to the length of the training piano-roll segments. We show how such a model is conditioned on the input and can be used to harmonize a given melody, complete an incomplete piano-roll or generate a variation of a given piece. The code is shared publicly to encourage the use and development of the method by the community.  

