# 4 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 10 Apr to 14 Apr

### Reinforcement Learning Tutor Better Supported Lower Performers in a Math Task
**source**: arXiv:2304.04933 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04933)]  
**abstract**: Resource limitations make it hard to provide all students with one of the most effective educational interventions: personalized instruction. Reinforcement learning could be a key tool to reduce the development cost and improve the effectiveness of, intelligent tutoring software that aims to provide the right support, at the right time, to a student. Here we illustrate that deep reinforcement learning can be used to provide adaptive pedagogical support to students learning about the concept of volume in a narrative storyline software. Using explainable artificial intelligence tools, we also extracted interpretable insights about the pedagogical policy learned, and we demonstrate that the resulting policy had similar performance in a different student population. Most importantly, in both studies the reinforcement-learning narrative system had the largest benefit for those students with the lowest initial pretest scores, suggesting the opportunity for AI to adapt and provide support for those most in need.  

### Scallop: A Language for Neurosymbolic Programming
**source**: arXiv:2304.04812 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04812)]  
**abstract**: We present Scallop, a language which combines the benefits of deep learning and logical reasoning. Scallop enables users to write a wide range of neurosymbolic applications and train them in a data- and compute-efficient manner. It achieves these goals through three key features: 1) a flexible symbolic representation that is based on the relational data model; 2) a declarative logic programming language that is based on Datalog and supports recursion, aggregation, and negation; and 3) a framework for automatic and efficient differentiable reasoning that is based on the theory of provenance semirings. We evaluate Scallop on a suite of eight neurosymbolic applications from the literature. Our evaluation demonstrates that Scallop is capable of expressing algorithmic reasoning in diverse and challenging AI tasks, provides a succinct interface for machine learning programmers to integrate logical domain knowledge, and yields solutions that are comparable or superior to state-of-the-art models in terms of accuracy. Furthermore, Scallop's solutions outperform these models in aspects such as runtime and data efficiency, interpretability, and generalizability.  

### Why think step-by-step? Reasoning emerges from the locality of experience
**source**: arXiv:2304.03843 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03843)]  
**abstract**: Humans have a powerful and mysterious capacity to reason. By working through a series of purely mental steps, we can make inferences we would not be capable of making directly -- despite that fact that we get no additional data from the world. Similarly, large language models can perform better at complex tasks through chain-of-thought reasoning, where they generate intermediate steps before answering a question. We use language models to investigate the questions of when and why reasoning is helpful, testing the hypothesis that reasoning is effective when training data consisting of local clusters of variables that influence each other strongly. These training conditions enable the chaining of accurate local inferences in order to estimate relationships between variables that were not seen together in training. We train an autoregressive transformer on samples from joint distributions defined by Bayes nets, but only include a subset of all the variables in each sample. We compare language models' ability to match conditional probabilities both with and without intermediate reasoning steps, finding that intermediate steps help only when the training data is locally structured with respect to dependencies between variables. Furthermore, intermediate variables need to be relevant to the relationship between observed information and target inferences. Our results illustrate how the statistical structure of training data drives the effectiveness of reasoning step by step.  

### Evaluating the Logical Reasoning Ability of ChatGPT and GPT-4
**source**: arXiv:2304.03439 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03439)]  
**abstract**: Harnessing logical reasoning ability is a comprehensive natural language understanding endeavor. With the release of Generative Pretrained Transformer 4 (GPT-4), highlighted as "advanced" at reasoning tasks, we are eager to learn the GPT-4 performance on various logical reasoning tasks. This report analyses multiple logical reasoning datasets, with popular benchmarks like LogiQA and ReClor, and newly-released datasets like AR-LSAT. We test the multi-choice reading comprehension and natural language inference tasks with benchmarks requiring logical reasoning. We further construct a logical reasoning out-of-distribution dataset to investigate the robustness of ChatGPT and GPT-4. We also make a performance comparison between ChatGPT and GPT-4. Experiment results show that ChatGPT performs significantly better than the RoBERTa fine-tuning method on most logical reasoning benchmarks. GPT-4 shows even higher performance on our manual tests. Among benchmarks, ChatGPT and GPT-4 do relatively well on well-known datasets like LogiQA and ReClor. However, the performance drops significantly when handling newly released and out-of-distribution datasets. Logical reasoning remains challenging for ChatGPT and GPT-4, especially on out-of-distribution and natural language inference datasets.  

