# 13 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 24 Apr to 28 Apr

### Interpretable Neural-Symbolic Concept Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2304.14068 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14068)]  
**abstract**: Deep learning methods are highly accurate, yet their opaque decision process prevents them from earning full human trust. Concept-based models aim to address this issue by learning tasks based on a set of human-understandable concepts. However, state-of-the-art concept-based models rely on high-dimensional concept embedding representations which lack a clear semantic meaning, thus questioning the interpretability of their decision process. To overcome this limitation, we propose the Deep Concept Reasoner (DCR), the first interpretable concept-based model that builds upon concept embeddings. In DCR, neural networks do not make task predictions directly, but they build syntactic rule structures using concept embeddings. DCR then executes these rules on meaningful concept truth degrees to provide a final interpretable and semantically-consistent prediction in a differentiable manner. Our experiments show that DCR: (i) improves up to +25% w.r.t. state-of-the-art interpretable concept-based models on challenging benchmarks (ii) discovers meaningful logic rules matching known ground truths even in the absence of concept supervision during training, and (iii), facilitates the generation of counterfactual examples providing the learnt rules as guidance.  

### Federated Prompting and Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for Improving LLMs Answering
**source**: arXiv:2304.13911 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13911)]  
**abstract**: We investigate how to enhance answer precision in frequently asked questions posed by distributed users using cloud-based Large Language Models (LLMs). Our study focuses on a typical situations where users ask similar queries that involve identical mathematical reasoning steps and problem-solving procedures. Due to the unsatisfactory accuracy of LLMs' zero-shot prompting with standalone questions, we propose to improve the distributed synonymous questions using Self-Consistency (SC) and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) techniques. Specifically, we first retrieve synonymous questions from a crowd-sourced database and create a federated question pool. We call these federated synonymous questions with the same or different parameters SP-questions or DP-questions, respectively. We refer to our methods as Fed-SP-SC and Fed-DP-CoT, which can generate significantly more accurate answers for all user queries without requiring sophisticated model-tuning. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed methods can significantly enhance question accuracy by fully exploring the synonymous nature of the questions and the consistency of the answers.  

### Cluster Flow: how a hierarchical clustering layer make allows deep-NNs more resilient to hacking, more human-like and easily implements relational reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2304.14081 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14081)]  
**abstract**: Despite the huge recent breakthroughs in neural networks (NNs) for artificial intelligence (specifically deep convolutional networks) such NNs do not achieve human-level performance: they can be hacked by images that would fool no human and lack `common sense'. It has been argued that a basis of human-level intelligence is mankind's ability to perform relational reasoning: the comparison of different objects, measuring similarity, grasping of relations between objects and the converse, figuring out the odd one out in a set of objects. Mankind can even do this with objects they have never seen before. Here we show how ClusterFlow, a semi-supervised hierarchical clustering framework can operate on trained NNs utilising the rich multi-dimensional class and feature data found at the pre-SoftMax layer to build a hyperspacial map of classes/features and this adds more human-like functionality to modern deep convolutional neural networks. We demonstrate this with 3 tasks. 1. the statistical learning based `mistakes' made by infants when attending to images of cats and dogs. 2. improving both the resilience to hacking images and the accurate measure of certainty in deep-NNs. 3. Relational reasoning over sets of images, including those not known to the NN nor seen before. We also demonstrate that ClusterFlow can work on non-NN data and deal with missing data by testing it on a Chemistry dataset. This work suggests that modern deep NNs can be made more human-like without re-training of the NNs. As it is known that some methods used in deep and convolutional NNs are not biologically plausible or perhaps even the best approach: the ClusterFlow framework can sit on top of any NN and will be a useful tool to add as NNs are improved in this regard.  

### Neuro-symbolic Zero-Shot Code Cloning with Cross-Language Intermediate Representation
**source**: arXiv:2304.13350 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13350)]  
**abstract**: In this paper, we define a neuro-symbolic approach to address the task of finding semantically similar clones for the codes of the legacy programming language COBOL, without training data. We define a meta-model that is instantiated to have an Intermediate Representation (IR) in the form of Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) common across codes in C and COBOL. We linearize the IRs using Structure Based Traversal (SBT) to create sequential inputs. We further fine-tune UnixCoder, the best-performing model for zero-shot cross-programming language code search, for the Code Cloning task with the SBT IRs of C code-pairs, available in the CodeNet dataset. This allows us to learn latent representations for the IRs of the C codes, which are transferable to the IRs of the COBOL codes. With this fine-tuned UnixCoder, we get a performance improvement of 12.85 MAP@2 over the pre-trained UniXCoder model, in a zero-shot setting, on the COBOL test split synthesized from the CodeNet dataset. This demonstrates the efficacy of our meta-model based approach to facilitate cross-programming language transfer.  

### Reinforcement Learning with Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: A Brief Survey
**source**: arXiv:2304.12090 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12090)]  
**abstract**: Reinforcement Learning(RL) has achieved tremendous development in recent years, but still faces significant obstacles in addressing complex real-life problems due to the issues of poor system generalization, low sample efficiency as well as safety and interpretability concerns. The core reason underlying such dilemmas can be attributed to the fact that most of the work has focused on the computational aspect of value functions or policies using a representational model to describe atomic components of rewards, states and actions etc, thus neglecting the rich high-level declarative domain knowledge of facts, relations and rules that can be either provided a priori or acquired through reasoning over time. Recently, there has been a rapidly growing interest in the use of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning(KRR) methods, usually using logical languages, to enable more abstract representation and efficient learning in RL. In this survey, we provide a preliminary overview on these endeavors that leverage the strengths of KRR to help solving various problems in RL, and discuss the challenging open problems and possible directions for future work in this area.  

### Geometric Relational Embeddings: A Survey
**source**: arXiv:2304.11949 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11949)]  
**abstract**: Geometric relational embeddings map relational data as geometric objects that combine vector information suitable for machine learning and structured/relational information for structured/relational reasoning, typically in low dimensions. Their preservation of relational structures and their appealing properties and interpretability have led to their uptake for tasks such as knowledge graph completion, ontology and hierarchy reasoning, logical query answering, and hierarchical multi-label classification. We survey methods that underly geometric relational embeddings and categorize them based on (i) the embedding geometries that are used to represent the data; and (ii) the relational reasoning tasks that they aim to improve. We identify the desired properties (i.e., inductive biases) of each kind of embedding and discuss some potential future work.  

### A Neuro-Symbolic Approach for Enhanced Human Motion Prediction
**source**: arXiv:2304.11740 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11740)]  
**abstract**: Reasoning on the context of human beings is crucial for many real-world applications especially for those deploying autonomous systems (e.g. robots). In this paper, we present a new approach for context reasoning to further advance the field of human motion prediction. We therefore propose a neuro-symbolic approach for human motion prediction (NeuroSyM), which weights differently the interactions in the neighbourhood by leveraging an intuitive technique for spatial representation called Qualitative Trajectory Calculus (QTC). The proposed approach is experimentally tested on medium and long term time horizons using two architectures from the state of art, one of which is a baseline for human motion prediction and the other is a baseline for generic multivariate time-series prediction. Six datasets of challenging crowded scenarios, collected from both fixed and mobile cameras, were used for testing. Experimental results show that the NeuroSyM approach outperforms in most cases the baseline architectures in terms of prediction accuracy.  

### Who's the Best Detective? LLMs vs. MLs in Detecting Incoherent Fourth Grade Math Answers
**source**: arXiv:2304.11257 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11257)]  
**abstract**: Written answers to open-ended questions can have a higher long-term effect on learning than multiple-choice questions. However, it is critical that teachers immediately review the answers, and ask to redo those that are incoherent. This can be a difficult task and can be time-consuming for teachers. A possible solution is to automate the detection of incoherent answers. One option is to automate the review with Large Language Models (LLM). In this paper, we analyze the responses of fourth graders in mathematics using three LLMs: GPT-3, BLOOM, and YOU. We used them with zero, one, two, three and four shots. We compared their performance with the results of various classifiers trained with Machine Learning (ML). We found that LLMs perform worse than MLs in detecting incoherent answers. The difficulty seems to reside in recursive questions that contain both questions and answers, and in responses from students with typical fourth-grader misspellings. Upon closer examination, we have found that the ChatGPT model faces the same challenges.  

### Dialectical language model evaluation: An initial appraisal of the commonsense spatial reasoning abilities of LLMs
**source**: arXiv:2304.11164 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11164)]  
**abstract**: Language models have become very popular recently and many claims have been made about their abilities, including for commonsense reasoning. Given the increasingly better results of current language models on previous static benchmarks for commonsense reasoning, we explore an alternative dialectical evaluation. The goal of this kind of evaluation is not to obtain an aggregate performance value but to find failures and map the boundaries of the system. Dialoguing with the system gives the opportunity to check for consistency and get more reassurance of these boundaries beyond anecdotal evidence. In this paper we conduct some qualitative investigations of this kind of evaluation for the particular case of spatial reasoning (which is a fundamental aspect of commonsense reasoning). We conclude with some suggestions for future work both to improve the capabilities of language models and to systematise this kind of dialectical evaluation.  

### A Review of Symbolic, Subsymbolic and Hybrid Methods for Sequential Decision Making
**source**: arXiv:2304.10590 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.10590)]  
**abstract**: The field of Sequential Decision Making (SDM) provides tools for solving Sequential Decision Processes (SDPs), where an agent must make a series of decisions in order to complete a task or achieve a goal. Historically, two competing SDM paradigms have view for supremacy. Automated Planning (AP) proposes to solve SDPs by performing a reasoning process over a model of the world, often represented symbolically. Conversely, Reinforcement Learning (RL) proposes to learn the solution of the SDP from data, without a world model, and represent the learned knowledge subsymbolically. In the spirit of reconciliation, we provide a review of symbolic, subsymbolic and hybrid methods for SDM. We cover both methods for solving SDPs (e.g., AP, RL and techniques that learn to plan) and for learning aspects of their structure (e.g., world models, state invariants and landmarks). To the best of our knowledge, no other review in the field provides the same scope. As an additional contribution, we discuss what properties an ideal method for SDM should exhibit and argue that neurosymbolic AI is the current approach which most closely resembles this ideal method. Finally, we outline several proposals to advance the field of SDM via the integration of symbolic and subsymbolic AI.  

### Evaluating Transformer Language Models on Arithmetic Operations Using Number Decomposition
**source**: arXiv:2304.10977 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.10977)]  
**abstract**: In recent years, Large Language Models such as GPT-3 showed remarkable capabilities in performing NLP tasks in the zero and few shot settings. On the other hand, the experiments highlighted the difficulty of GPT-3 in carrying out tasks that require a certain degree of reasoning, such as arithmetic operations. In this paper we evaluate the ability of Transformer Language Models to perform arithmetic operations following a pipeline that, before performing computations, decomposes numbers in units, tens, and so on. We denote the models fine-tuned with this pipeline with the name Calculon and we test them in the task of performing additions, subtractions and multiplications on the same test sets of GPT-3. Results show an increase of accuracy of 63% in the five-digit addition task. Moreover, we demonstrate the importance of the decomposition pipeline introduced, since fine-tuning the same Language Model without decomposing numbers results in 0% accuracy in the five-digit addition task.  

### Is deep learning a useful tool for the pure mathematician?
**source**: arXiv:2304.12602 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12602)]  
**abstract**: A personal and informal account of what a pure mathematician might expect when using tools from deep learning in their research.  

### Explainable AI Insights for Symbolic Computation: A case study on selecting the variable ordering for cylindrical algebraic decomposition
**source**: arXiv:2304.12154 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12154)]  
**abstract**: In recent years there has been increased use of machine learning (ML) techniques within mathematics, including symbolic computation where it may be applied safely to optimise or select algorithms. This paper explores whether using explainable AI (XAI) techniques on such ML models can offer new insight for symbolic computation, inspiring new implementations within computer algebra systems that do not directly call upon AI tools. We present a case study on the use of ML to select the variable ordering for cylindrical algebraic decomposition. It has already been demonstrated that ML can make the choice well, but here we show how the SHAP tool for explainability can be used to inform new heuristics of a size and complexity similar to those human-designed heuristics currently commonly used in symbolic computation.  

