# 11 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 27 Mar to 31 Mar

### Advances in apparent conceptual physics reasoning in ChatGPT-4
**source**: arXiv:2303.17012 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17012)]  
**abstract**: ChatGPT is built on a large language model trained on an enormous corpus of human text to emulate human conversation. Despite lacking any explicit programming regarding the laws of physics, recent work by Kortemeyer (2023) has demonstrated that ChatGPT-3.5 could pass an introductory physics course at some nominal level and register something close to a minimal understanding of Newtonian Mechanics on the Force Concept Inventory. This work replicates those results and also demonstrates that the latest version, ChatGPT-4, has reached a much higher mark in the latter context. Indeed, its responses come quite close to perfectly demonstrating expert-level competence, with a few very notable exceptions and limitations. We briefly comment on the implications of this for the future of physics education and pedagogy.  

### Neuro-symbolic Rule Learning in Real-world Classification Tasks
**source**: arXiv:2303.16674 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16674)]  
**abstract**: Neuro-symbolic rule learning has attracted lots of attention as it offers better interpretability than pure neural models and scales better than symbolic rule learning. A recent approach named pix2rule proposes a neural Disjunctive Normal Form (neural DNF) module to learn symbolic rules with feed-forward layers. Although proved to be effective in synthetic binary classification, pix2rule has not been applied to more challenging tasks such as multi-label and multi-class classifications over real-world data. In this paper, we address this limitation by extending the neural DNF module to (i) support rule learning in real-world multi-class and multi-label classification tasks, (ii) enforce the symbolic property of mutual exclusivity (i.e. predicting exactly one class) in multi-class classification, and (iii) explore its scalability over large inputs and outputs. We train a vanilla neural DNF model similar to pix2rule's neural DNF module for multi-label classification, and we propose a novel extended model called neural DNF-EO (Exactly One) which enforces mutual exclusivity in multi-class classification. We evaluate the classification performance, scalability and interpretability of our neural DNF-based models, and compare them against pure neural models and a state-of-the-art symbolic rule learner named FastLAS. We demonstrate that our neural DNF-based models perform similarly to neural networks, but provide better interpretability by enabling the extraction of logical rules. Our models also scale well when the rule search space grows in size, in contrast to FastLAS, which fails to learn in multi-class classification tasks with 200 classes and in all multi-label settings.  

### Explicit Planning Helps Language Models in Logical Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.15714 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15714)]  
**abstract**: Language models have been shown to perform remarkably well on a wide range of natural language processing tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel system that uses language models to perform multi-step logical reasoning. Our system incorporates explicit planning into its inference procedure, thus able to make more informed reasoning decisions at each step by looking ahead into their future effects. In our experiments, our full system significantly outperforms other competing systems. On a multiple-choice question answering task, our system performs competitively compared to GPT-3-davinci despite having only around 1.5B parameters. We conduct several ablation studies to demonstrate that explicit planning plays a crucial role in the system's performance.  

### Mathematical Challenges in Deep Learning
**source**: arXiv:2303.15464 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15464)]  
**abstract**: Deep models are dominating the artificial intelligence (AI) industry since the ImageNet challenge in 2012. The size of deep models is increasing ever since, which brings new challenges to this field with applications in cell phones, personal computers, autonomous cars, and wireless base stations. Here we list a set of problems, ranging from training, inference, generalization bound, and optimization with some formalism to communicate these challenges with mathematicians, statisticians, and theoretical computer scientists. This is a subjective view of the research questions in deep learning that benefits the tech industry in long run.  

### Pitchclass2vec: Symbolic Music Structure Segmentation with Chord Embeddings
**source**: arXiv:2303.15306 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15306)]  
**abstract**: Structure perception is a fundamental aspect of music cognition in humans. Historically, the hierarchical organization of music into structures served as a narrative device for conveying meaning, creating expectancy, and evoking emotions in the listener. Thereby, musical structures play an essential role in music composition, as they shape the musical discourse through which the composer organises his ideas. In this paper, we present a novel music segmentation method, pitchclass2vec, based on symbolic chord annotations, which are embedded into continuous vector representations using both natural language processing techniques and custom-made encodings. Our algorithm is based on long-short term memory (LSTM) neural network and outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques based on symbolic chord annotations in the field.  

### Mutually-paced Knowledge Distillation for Cross-lingual Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2303.14898 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14898)]  
**abstract**: This paper investigates cross-lingual temporal knowledge graph reasoning problem, which aims to facilitate reasoning on Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs) in low-resource languages by transfering knowledge from TKGs in high-resource ones. The cross-lingual distillation ability across TKGs becomes increasingly crucial, in light of the unsatisfying performance of existing reasoning methods on those severely incomplete TKGs, especially in low-resource languages. However, it poses tremendous challenges in two aspects. First, the cross-lingual alignments, which serve as bridges for knowledge transfer, are usually too scarce to transfer sufficient knowledge between two TKGs. Second, temporal knowledge discrepancy of the aligned entities, especially when alignments are unreliable, can mislead the knowledge distillation process. We correspondingly propose a mutually-paced knowledge distillation model MP-KD, where a teacher network trained on a source TKG can guide the training of a student network on target TKGs with an alignment module. Concretely, to deal with the scarcity issue, MP-KD generates pseudo alignments between TKGs based on the temporal information extracted by our representation module. To maximize the efficacy of knowledge transfer and control the noise caused by the temporal knowledge discrepancy, we enhance MP-KD with a temporal cross-lingual attention mechanism to dynamically estimate the alignment strength. The two procedures are mutually paced along with model training. Extensive experiments on twelve cross-lingual TKG transfer tasks in the EventKG benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed MP-KD method.  

### Are LLMs the Master of All Trades? : Exploring Domain-Agnostic Reasoning Skills of LLMs
**source**: arXiv:2303.12810 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12810)]  
**abstract**: The potential of large language models (LLMs) to reason like humans has been a highly contested topic in Machine Learning communities. However, the reasoning abilities of humans are multifaceted and can be seen in various forms, including analogical, spatial and moral reasoning, among others. This fact raises the question whether LLMs can perform equally well across all these different domains. This research work aims to investigate the performance of LLMs on different reasoning tasks by conducting experiments that directly use or draw inspirations from existing datasets on analogical and spatial reasoning. Additionally, to evaluate the ability of LLMs to reason like human, their performance is evaluted on more open-ended, natural language questions. My findings indicate that LLMs excel at analogical and moral reasoning, yet struggle to perform as proficiently on spatial reasoning tasks. I believe these experiments are crucial for informing the future development of LLMs, particularly in contexts that require diverse reasoning proficiencies. By shedding light on the reasoning abilities of LLMs, this study aims to push forward our understanding of how they can better emulate the cognitive abilities of humans.  

### Efficient Symbolic Reasoning for Neural-Network Verification
**source**: arXiv:2303.13588 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13588)]  
**abstract**: The neural network has become an integral part of modern software systems. However, they still suffer from various problems, in particular, vulnerability to adversarial attacks. In this work, we present a novel program reasoning framework for neural-network verification, which we refer to as symbolic reasoning. The key components of our framework are the use of the symbolic domain and the quadratic relation. The symbolic domain has very flexible semantics, and the quadratic relation is quite expressive. They allow us to encode many verification problems for neural networks as quadratic programs. Our scheme then relaxes the quadratic programs to semidefinite programs, which can be efficiently solved. This framework allows us to verify various neural-network properties under different scenarios, especially those that appear challenging for non-symbolic domains. Moreover, it introduces new representations and perspectives for the verification tasks. We believe that our framework can bring new theoretical insights and practical tools to verification problems for neural networks.  

### OntoMath${}^{\mathbf{PRO}}$ 2.0 Ontology: Updates of the Formal Model
**source**: arXiv:2303.13542 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13542)]  
**abstract**: This paper is devoted to the problems of ontology-based mathematical knowledge management and representation. The main attention is paid to the development of a formal model for the representation of mathematical statements in the Open Linked Data cloud. The proposed model is intended for applications that extract mathematical facts from natural language mathematical texts and represent these facts as Linked Open Data. The model is used in development of a new version of the OntoMath${}^{\mathrm{PRO}}$ ontology of professional mathematics is described. OntoMath${}^{\mathrm{PRO}}$ underlies a semantic publishing platform, that takes as an input a collection of mathematical papers in LaTeX format and builds their ontology-based Linked Open Data representation. The semantic publishing platform, in turn, is a central component of OntoMath digital ecosystem, an ecosystem of ontologies, text analytics tools, and applications for mathematical knowledge management, including semantic search for mathematical formulas and a recommender system for mathematical papers. According to the new model, the ontology is organized into three layers: a foundational ontology layer, a domain ontology layer and a linguistic layer. The domain ontology layer contains language-independent math concepts. The linguistic layer provides linguistic grounding for these concepts, and the foundation ontology layer provides them with meta-ontological annotations. The concepts are organized in two main hierarchies: the hierarchy of objects and the hierarchy of reified relationships.  

### Physics Symbolic Learner for Discovering Ground-Motion Models Via NGA-West2 Database
**source**: arXiv:2303.14179 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14179)]  
**abstract**: Ground-motion model (GMM) is the basis of many earthquake engineering studies. In this study, a novel physics-informed symbolic learner (PISL) method based on the Nest Generation Attenuation-West2 database is proposed to automatically discover mathematical equation operators as symbols. The sequential threshold ridge regression algorithm is utilized to distill a concise and interpretable explicit characterization of complex systems of ground motions. In addition to the basic variables retrieved from previous GMMs, the current PISL incorporates two a priori physical conditions, namely, distance and amplitude saturation. GMMs developed using the PISL, an empirical regression method (ERM), and an artificial neural network (ANN) are compared in terms of residuals and extrapolation based on obtained data of peak ground acceleration and velocity. The results show that the inter- and intra-event standard deviations of the three methods are similar. The functional form of the PISL is more concise than that of the ERM and ANN. The extrapolation capability of the PISL is more accurate than that of the ANN. The PISL-GMM used in this study provide a new paradigm of regression that considers both physical and data-driven machine learning and can be used to identify the implied physical relationships and prediction equations of ground motion variables in different regions.  

### Symbolic Music Structure Analysis with Graph Representations and Changepoint Detection Methods
**source**: arXiv:2303.13881 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.13881)]  
**abstract**: Music Structure Analysis is an open research task in Music Information Retrieval (MIR). In the past, there have been several works that attempt to segment music into the audio and symbolic domains, however, the identification and segmentation of the music structure at different levels is still an open research problem in this area. In this work we propose three methods, two of which are novel graph-based algorithms that aim to segment symbolic music by its form or structure: Norm, G-PELT and G-Window. We performed an ablation study with two public datasets that have different forms or structures in order to compare such methods varying their parameter values and comparing the performance against different music styles. We have found that encoding symbolic music with graph representations and computing the novelty of Adjacency Matrices obtained from graphs represent the structure of symbolic music pieces well without the need to extract features from it. We are able to detect the boundaries with an online unsupervised changepoint detection method with a F_1 of 0.5640 for a 1 bar tolerance in one of the public datasets that we used for testing our methods. We also provide the performance results of the algorithms at different levels of structure, high, medium and low, to show how the parameters of the proposed methods have to be adjusted depending on the level. We added the best performing method with its parameters for each structure level to musicaiz, an open source python package, to facilitate the reproducibility and usability of this work. We hope that this methods could be used to improve other MIR tasks such as music generation with structure, music classification or key changes detection.  

