# 7 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 1 May to 5 May

### Continual Reasoning: Non-Monotonic Reasoning in Neurosymbolic AI using Continual Learning
**source**: arXiv:2305.02171 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02171)]  
**abstract**: Despite the extensive investment and impressive recent progress at reasoning by similarity, deep learning continues to struggle with more complex forms of reasoning such as non-monotonic and commonsense reasoning. Non-monotonicity is a property of non-classical reasoning typically seen in commonsense reasoning, whereby a reasoning system is allowed (differently from classical logic) to jump to conclusions which may be retracted later, when new information becomes available. Neural-symbolic systems such as Logic Tensor Networks (LTN) have been shown to be effective at enabling deep neural networks to achieve reasoning capabilities. In this paper, we show that by combining a neural-symbolic system with methods from continual learning, LTN can obtain a higher level of accuracy when addressing non-monotonic reasoning tasks. Continual learning is added to LTNs by adopting a curriculum of learning from knowledge and data with recall. We call this process Continual Reasoning, a new methodology for the application of neural-symbolic systems to reasoning tasks. Continual Reasoning is applied to a prototypical non-monotonic reasoning problem as well as other reasoning examples. Experimentation is conducted to compare and analyze the effects that different curriculum choices may have on overall learning and reasoning results. Results indicate significant improvement on the prototypical non-monotonic reasoning problem and a promising outlook for the proposed approach on statistical relational learning examples.  

### Where We Have Arrived in Proving the Emergence of Sparse Symbolic Concepts in AI Models
**source**: arXiv:2305.01939 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01939)]  
**abstract**: This paper aims to prove the emergence of symbolic concepts in well-trained AI models. We prove that if (1) the high-order derivatives of the model output w.r.t. the input variables are all zero, (2) the AI model can be used on occluded samples and will yield higher confidence when the input sample is less occluded, and (3) the confidence of the AI model does not significantly degrade on occluded samples, then the AI model will encode sparse interactive concepts. Each interactive concept represents an interaction between a specific set of input variables, and has a certain numerical effect on the inference score of the model. Specifically, it is proved that the inference score of the model can always be represented as the sum of the interaction effects of all interactive concepts. In fact, we hope to prove that conditions for the emergence of symbolic concepts are quite common. It means that for most AI models, we can usually use a small number of interactive concepts to mimic the model outputs on any arbitrarily masked samples.  

### Chronosymbolic Learning: Efficient CHC Solving with Symbolic Reasoning and Inductive Learning
**source**: arXiv:2305.01206 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01206)]  
**abstract**: Solving Constrained Horn Clauses (CHCs) is a fundamental challenge behind a wide range of verification and analysis tasks. Data-driven approaches show great promise in improving CHC solving without the painstaking manual effort of creating and tuning various heuristics. However, a large performance gap exists between data-driven CHC solvers and symbolic reasoning-based solvers. In this work, we develop a simple but effective framework, "Chronosymbolic Learning", which unifies symbolic information and numerical data points to solve a CHC system efficiently. We also present a simple instance of Chronosymbolic Learning with a data-driven learner and a BMC-styled reasoner. Despite its great simplicity, experimental results show the efficacy and robustness of our tool. It outperforms state-of-the-art CHC solvers on a dataset consisting of 288 benchmarks, including many instances with non-linear integer arithmetics.  

### Complex Logical Reasoning over Knowledge Graphs using Large Language Models
**source**: arXiv:2305.01157 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01157)]  
**abstract**: Reasoning over knowledge graphs (KGs) is a challenging task that requires a deep understanding of the complex relationships between entities and the underlying logic of their relations. Current approaches rely on learning geometries to embed entities in vector space for logical query operations, but they suffer from subpar performance on complex queries and dataset-specific representations. In this paper, we propose a novel decoupled approach, Language-guided Abstract Reasoning over Knowledge graphs (LARK), that formulates complex KG reasoning as a combination of contextual KG search and abstract logical query reasoning, to leverage the strengths of graph extraction algorithms and large language models (LLM), respectively. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art KG reasoning methods on standard benchmark datasets across several logical query constructs, with significant performance gain for queries of higher complexity. Furthermore, we show that the performance of our approach improves proportionally to the increase in size of the underlying LLM, enabling the integration of the latest advancements in LLMs for logical reasoning over KGs. Our work presents a new direction for addressing the challenges of complex KG reasoning and paves the way for future research in this area.  

### Neurosymbolic AI - Why, What, and How
**source**: arXiv:2305.00813 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00813)]  
**abstract**: Humans interact with the environment using a combination of perception - transforming sensory inputs from their environment into symbols, and cognition - mapping symbols to knowledge about the environment for supporting abstraction, reasoning by analogy, and long-term planning. Human perception-inspired machine perception, in the context of AI, refers to large-scale pattern recognition from raw data using neural networks trained using self-supervised learning objectives such as next-word prediction or object recognition. On the other hand, machine cognition encompasses more complex computations, such as using knowledge of the environment to guide reasoning, analogy, and long-term planning. Humans can also control and explain their cognitive functions. This seems to require the retention of symbolic mappings from perception outputs to knowledge about their environment. For example, humans can follow and explain the guidelines and safety constraints driving their decision-making in safety-critical applications such as healthcare, criminal justice, and autonomous driving. This article introduces the rapidly emerging paradigm of Neurosymbolic AI combines neural networks and knowledge-guided symbolic approaches to create more capable and flexible AI systems. These systems have immense potential to advance both algorithm-level (e.g., abstraction, analogy, reasoning) and application-level (e.g., explainable and safety-constrained decision-making) capabilities of AI systems.  

### How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?: Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model
**source**: arXiv:2305.00586 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00586)]  
**abstract**: Pre-trained language models can be surprisingly adept at tasks they were not explicitly trained on, but how they implement these capabilities is poorly understood. In this paper, we investigate the basic mathematical abilities often acquired by pre-trained language models. Concretely, we use mechanistic interpretability techniques to explain the (limited) mathematical abilities of GPT-2 small. As a case study, we examine its ability to take in sentences such as "The war lasted from the year 1732 to the year 17", and predict valid two-digit end years (years > 32). We first identify a circuit, a small subset of GPT-2 small's computational graph that computes this task's output. Then, we explain the role of each circuit component, showing that GPT-2 small's final multi-layer perceptrons boost the probability of end years greater than the start year. Finally, we show that our circuit generalizes to other tasks, playing a role in other greater-than scenarios.  

### Interpretable Machine Learning for Science with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl
**source**: arXiv:2305.01582 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01582)]  
**abstract**: PySR is an open-source library for practical symbolic regression, a type of machine learning which aims to discover human-interpretable symbolic models. PySR was developed to democratize and popularize symbolic regression for the sciences, and is built on a high-performance distributed back-end, a flexible search algorithm, and interfaces with several deep learning packages. PySR's internal search algorithm is a multi-population evolutionary algorithm, which consists of a unique evolve-simplify-optimize loop, designed for optimization of unknown scalar constants in newly-discovered empirical expressions. PySR's backend is the extremely optimized Julia library SymbolicRegression.jl, which can be used directly from Julia. It is capable of fusing user-defined operators into SIMD kernels at runtime, performing automatic differentiation, and distributing populations of expressions to thousands of cores across a cluster. In describing this software, we also introduce a new benchmark, "EmpiricalBench," to quantify the applicability of symbolic regression algorithms in science. This benchmark measures recovery of historical empirical equations from original and synthetic datasets.  

