# 12 papers from arxiv about "AI for Math" from 15 May to 19 May

### Lightweight Online Learning for Sets of Related Problems in Automated Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2305.11087 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11087)]  
**abstract**: We present Self-Driven Strategy Learning (sdsl), a lightweight online learning methodology for automated reasoning tasks that involve solving a set of related problems. sdsl automatically gathers information, in form of a dataset, while solving earlier problems. It utilizes the learned data to adjust the solving strategy for later problems by fitting a machine learning model to the obtained data on the fly. We formally define the approach as a set of abstract transition rules. We describe a concrete instance of the sdsl calculus which uses conditional sampling for generating data and random forests as the underlying machine learning model. We implement the approach on top of the Kissat solver and show that the combination of Kissat+sdsl certifies larger bounds and finds more counter-examples than other state-of-the-art bounded model checking approaches on benchmarks obtained from the latest Hardware Model Checking Competition.  

### ReasonNet: End-to-End Driving with Temporal and Global Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2305.10507 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10507)]  
**abstract**: The large-scale deployment of autonomous vehicles is yet to come, and one of the major remaining challenges lies in urban dense traffic scenarios. In such cases, it remains challenging to predict the future evolution of the scene and future behaviors of objects, and to deal with rare adverse events such as the sudden appearance of occluded objects. In this paper, we present ReasonNet, a novel end-to-end driving framework that extensively exploits both temporal and global information of the driving scene. By reasoning on the temporal behavior of objects, our method can effectively process the interactions and relationships among features in different frames. Reasoning about the global information of the scene can also improve overall perception performance and benefit the detection of adverse events, especially the anticipation of potential danger from occluded objects. For comprehensive evaluation on occlusion events, we also release publicly a driving simulation benchmark DriveOcclusionSim consisting of diverse occlusion events. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple CARLA benchmarks, where our model outperforms all prior methods, ranking first on the sensor track of the public CARLA Leaderboard.  

### Neuro-Symbolic AI for Compliance Checking of Electrical Control Panels
**source**: arXiv:2305.10113 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10113)]  
**abstract**: Artificial Intelligence plays a main role in supporting and improving smart manufacturing and Industry 4.0, by enabling the automation of different types of tasks manually performed by domain experts. In particular, assessing the compliance of a product with the relative schematic is a time-consuming and prone-to-error process. In this paper, we address this problem in a specific industrial scenario. In particular, we define a Neuro-Symbolic approach for automating the compliance verification of the electrical control panels. Our approach is based on the combination of Deep Learning techniques with Answer Set Programming (ASP), and allows for identifying possible anomalies and errors in the final product even when a very limited amount of training data is available. The experiments conducted on a real test case provided by an Italian Company operating in electrical control panel production demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.  

### River of No Return: Graph Percolation Embeddings for Efficient Knowledge Graph Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2305.09974 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09974)]  
**abstract**: We study Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)-based embedding techniques for knowledge graph (KG) reasoning. For the first time, we link the path redundancy issue in the state-of-the-art KG reasoning models based on path encoding and message passing to the transformation error in model training, which brings us new theoretical insights into KG reasoning, as well as high efficacy in practice. On the theoretical side, we analyze the entropy of transformation error in KG paths and point out query-specific redundant paths causing entropy increases. These findings guide us to maintain the shortest paths and remove redundant paths for minimized-entropy message passing. To achieve this goal, on the practical side, we propose an efficient Graph Percolation Process motivated by the percolation model in Fluid Mechanics, and design a lightweight GNN-based KG reasoning framework called Graph Percolation Embeddings (GraPE). GraPE outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in both transductive and inductive reasoning tasks while requiring fewer training parameters and less inference time.  

### Discrete Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Symbolic Music Generation
**source**: arXiv:2305.09489 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09489)]  
**abstract**: Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) have made great strides in generating high-quality samples in both discrete and continuous domains. However, Discrete DDPMs (D3PMs) have yet to be applied to the domain of Symbolic Music. This work presents the direct generation of Polyphonic Symbolic Music using D3PMs. Our model exhibits state-of-the-art sample quality, according to current quantitative evaluation metrics, and allows for flexible infilling at the note level. We further show, that our models are accessible to post-hoc classifier guidance, widening the scope of possible applications. However, we also cast a critical view on quantitative evaluation of music sample quality via statistical metrics, and present a simple algorithm that can confound our metrics with completely spurious, non-musical samples.  

### Neurosymbolic AI and its Taxonomy: a survey
**source**: arXiv:2305.08876 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08876)]  
**abstract**: Neurosymbolic AI deals with models that combine symbolic processing, like classic AI, and neural networks, as it's a very established area. These models are emerging as an effort toward Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) by both exploring an alternative to just increasing datasets' and models' sizes and combining Learning over the data distribution, Reasoning on prior and learned knowledge, and by symbiotically using them. This survey investigates research papers in this area during recent years and brings classification and comparison between the presented models as well as applications.  

### Is ChatGPT a Good Causal Reasoner? A Comprehensive Evaluation
**source**: arXiv:2305.07375 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07375)]  
**abstract**: Causal reasoning ability is crucial for numerous NLP applications. Despite the impressive emerging ability of ChatGPT in various NLP tasks, it is unclear how well ChatGPT performs in causal reasoning. In this paper, we conduct the first comprehensive evaluation of the ChatGPT's causal reasoning capabilities. Experiments show that ChatGPT is not a good causal reasoner, but a good causal interpreter. Besides, ChatGPT has a serious hallucination on causal reasoning, possibly due to the reporting biases between causal and non-causal relationships in natural language, as well as ChatGPT's upgrading processes, such as RLHF. The In-Context Learning (ICL) and Chain-of-Though (COT) techniques can further exacerbate such causal hallucination. Additionally, the causal reasoning ability of ChatGPT is sensitive to the words used to express the causal concept in prompts, and close-ended prompts perform better than open-ended prompts. For events in sentences, ChatGPT excels at capturing explicit causality rather than implicit causality, and performs better in sentences with lower event density and smaller lexical distance between events.  

### S-REINFORCE: A Neuro-Symbolic Policy Gradient Approach for Interpretable Reinforcement Learning
**source**: arXiv:2305.07367 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07367)]  
**abstract**: This paper presents a novel RL algorithm, S-REINFORCE, which is designed to generate interpretable policies for dynamic decision-making tasks. The proposed algorithm leverages two types of function approximators, namely Neural Network (NN) and Symbolic Regressor (SR), to produce numerical and symbolic policies, respectively. The NN component learns to generate a numerical probability distribution over the possible actions using a policy gradient, while the SR component captures the functional form that relates the associated states with the action probabilities. The SR-generated policy expressions are then utilized through importance sampling to improve the rewards received during the learning process. We have tested the proposed S-REINFORCE algorithm on various dynamic decision-making problems with low and high dimensional action spaces, and the results demonstrate its effectiveness and impact in achieving interpretable solutions. By leveraging the strengths of both NN and SR, S-REINFORCE produces policies that are not only well-performing but also easy to interpret, making it an ideal choice for real-world applications where transparency and causality are crucial.  

### CatE: Embedding $\mathcal{ALC}$ ontologies using category-theoretical semantics
**source**: arXiv:2305.07163 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07163)]  
**abstract**: Machine learning with Semantic Web ontologies follows several strategies, one of which involves projecting ontologies into graph structures and applying graph embeddings or graph-based machine learning methods to the resulting graphs. Several methods have been developed that project ontology axioms into graphs. However, these methods are limited in the type of axioms they can project (totality), whether they are invertible (injectivity), and how they exploit semantic information. These limitations restrict the kind of tasks to which they can be applied. Category-theoretical semantics of logic languages formalizes interpretations using categories instead of sets, and categories have a graph-like structure. We developed CatE, which uses the category-theoretical formulation of the semantics of the Description Logic $\mathcal{ALC}$ to generate a graph representation for ontology axioms. The CatE projection is total and injective, and therefore overcomes limitations of other graph-based ontology embedding methods which are generally not invertible. We apply CatE to a number of different tasks, including deductive and inductive reasoning, and we demonstrate that CatE improves over state of the art ontology embedding methods. Furthermore, we show that CatE can also outperform model-theoretic ontology embedding methods in machine learning tasks in the biomedical domain.  

### StructGPT: A General Framework for Large Language Model to Reason over Structured Data
**source**: arXiv:2305.09645 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09645)]  
**abstract**: In this paper, we study how to improve the zero-shot reasoning ability of large language models~(LLMs) over structured data in a unified way. Inspired by the study on tool augmentation for LLMs, we develop an \emph{Iterative Reading-then-Reasoning~(IRR)} approach for solving question answering tasks based on structured data, called \textbf{StructGPT}. In our approach, we construct the specialized function to collect relevant evidence from structured data (\ie \emph{reading}), and let LLMs concentrate the reasoning task based on the collected information (\ie \emph{reasoning}). Specially, we propose an \emph{invoking-linearization-generation} procedure to support LLMs in reasoning on the structured data with the help of the external interfaces. By iterating this procedures with provided interfaces, our approach can gradually approach the target answer to a given query. Extensive experiments conducted on three types of structured data demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which can significantly boost the performance of ChatGPT and achieve comparable performance against the full-data supervised-tuning baselines. Our codes and data are publicly available at~\url{https://github.com/RUCAIBox/StructGPT}.  

### Comprehensive Solution Program Centric Pretraining for Table-and-Text Hybrid Numerical Reasoning
**source**: arXiv:2305.07475 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07475)]  
**abstract**: Numerical reasoning over table-and-text hybrid passages, such as financial reports, poses significant challenges and has numerous potential applications. Noise and irrelevant variables in the model input have been a hindrance to its performance. Additionally, coarse-grained supervision of the whole solution program has impeded the model's ability to learn the underlying numerical reasoning process. In this paper, we propose three pretraining tasks that operate at both the whole program and sub-program level: Variable Integrity Ranking, which guides the model to focus on useful variables; Variable Operator Prediction, which decomposes the supervision into fine-grained single operator prediction; and Variable Keyphrase Masking, which encourages the model to identify key evidence that sub-programs are derived from. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods, surpassing transformer-based model baselines.  

### Open-WikiTable: Dataset for Open Domain Question Answering with Complex Reasoning over Table
**source**: arXiv:2305.07288 [[paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07288)]  
**abstract**: Despite recent interest in open domain question answering (ODQA) over tables, many studies still rely on datasets that are not truly optimal for the task with respect to utilizing structural nature of table. These datasets assume answers reside as a single cell value and do not necessitate exploring over multiple cells such as aggregation, comparison, and sorting. Thus, we release Open-WikiTable, the first ODQA dataset that requires complex reasoning over tables. Open-WikiTable is built upon WikiSQL and WikiTableQuestions to be applicable in the open-domain setting. As each question is coupled with both textual answers and SQL queries, Open-WikiTable opens up a wide range of possibilities for future research, as both reader and parser methods can be applied. The dataset and code are publicly available.  

